Revamp the Getting Started page for Dataset (#24860)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/data/getting-started.rst

.. _datasets_getting_started:

Getting Started
===============

A Ray :class:`Dataset <ray.data.Dataset>` is a distributed data collection. It holds
a list of Ray object references pointing to distributed data **blocks**, and has APIs
for distributed data loading and processing. Each block holds an ordered collection
of items in the format of an `Arrow table <https://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/data.html#tables>`__

> or a Python list.

Reviewer: @ericl Why the removal of the Pandas block call-out?

Reviewer 2: Pandas is an implementation detail, and should not be exposed to the user.

Author: It looks Arrow as a data format is actually more internal?
Maybe what you say is Arrow/Python is *canonical format* in Ray Datasets whereas Pandas is something atop?

Reviewer 2: Let's just keep the wording as is for now... We can migrate to pure Arrow and get rid of Python list in the future anyway.

.. _datasets_getting_started:

> Dataset Quick Start

Reviewer: Also our convention is to also have overlining for the title header of a docs page.

===================

> Ray Dataset is an abstraction over a list of Ray object references to *blocks*, with APIs for distributed data loading and processing. Each block holds a set of items and can be in format of either an `Arrow table <https://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/data.html#tables>`__

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Ray :class:`Dataset <ray.data.Dataset>` is a distributed data collection, holding a list of Ray object references pointing to distributed data **blocks**, with APIs for distributed data loading and processing. Each block holds an ordered collection of items and can be in the format of either an `Arrow table <https://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/data.html#tables>`__
```

Author: Nice suggestion. I also like that we call out it's ordered.

, a `Pandas DataFrame <https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/api/pandas.DataFrame.html>`__
, or a Python list.

In this tutorial you will learn how to:

- Create and save a Ray ``Dataset``.
- Transform a ``Dataset``.
- Pass a ``Dataset`` to Ray tasks/actors and access the data inside.

.. tip::

   Run ``pip install "ray[data]"`` to get started!

Creating and Saving Datasets
----------------------------

You can create a Dataset from Python objects. These objects can be held inside Dataset as the plain Python objects (where the schema is a Python type), or as Arrow records (in which case their schema is Arrow).

> .. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/quick_start.py

Reviewer 2: This include isn't working.

Author: Sorry, a typo. Should fixed now.

   :language: python
   :start-after: __create_from_python_begin__`
   :end-before: __create_from_python_end__

> Datasets can also be created from files on local disk or remote datasources such as S3.

Reviewer: We should link out to the remote storage and file formats sections of the "Creating Datasets" feature guide here.

Author: Yeah, good point.

Any filesystem `supported by pyarrow <http://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/generated/pyarrow.fs.FileSystem.html>`__
can be used to specify file locations:

> .. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/quick_start.py

Reviewer 2: Also broken?

   :language: python
   :start-after: __create_from_files_begin__`
   :end-before: __create_from_files_end__

> Once you have a Dataset, you can save it to local or remote storage in desired format, using ``.write_csv()``, ``.write_json()``, and ``.write_parquet()``.

Reviewer: We should link out to the file formats section of the "Saving Datasets" feature guide here.

.. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/quick_start.py
   :language: python
   :start-after: __save_dataset_begin__
   :end-before: __save_dataset_end__

Transforming Datasets
---------------------

> Once you have a Dataset, you can transform it by applying a user-defined function and produce another Dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have a ``Dataset``, you can transform it by applying a user-defined function, which produces another ``Dataset``.
```

> Under the hood the transformation is executed in parrallel for performance at scale.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Under the hood the transformation is executed in parallel for performance at scale.
```

> Under the hood the transformation is executed in parrallel for performance at scale.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under-the-hood, the transformation is executed in parallel for performance at scale.
```

> .. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/quick_start.py

Reviewer 2: Could we make the example code not horizontal scroll? Consider trimming the progress bar / line wrap the show() output.

Author: Yep, code reformatted and black fmt off for the code block.

   :language: python
   :start-after: __data_transform_begin__
   :end-before: __data_transform_end__

.. tip::

>     Datasets also provides the convenience transformation methods ``map``, ``flat_map``, and ``filter``, which are not vectorized (slower than ``map_batches``), but may be useful for development.

Reviewer: These should be made into cross-reference links to the API docs, e.g.
```suggestion
    Datasets also provides the convenience transformation methods :meth:`ds.map() <ray.data.Dataset.map>`, :meth:`ds.flat_map() <ray.data.Dataset.flat_map>`, and :meth:`ds.filter() <ray.data.Dataset.filter>`, which are not vectorized (slower than :meth:`ds.map_batches() <ray.data.Dataset.map_batches>`), but may be useful for development.
```

> The transformation is composable. You can further apply transformations on the output Dataset, forming

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These transformations are composable. You can further apply transformations on the output ``Dataset``, forming
```

> a chain of transformations. Ray Dataset will optimize the execution by fusing transformations when appropriate.

Reviewer: Branding: We always use "Ray Datasets" when referring to the library.
```suggestion
a chain of transformations. Ray Datasets will optimize the execution by fusing transformations when appropriate.
```

Reviewer: Also given that this stage fusion only happens for lazy datasets and pipelines, we might not want to mention stage fusion in the Getting Started guide.

By default, transformations are executed using Ray tasks.

> For transformations that require setup, you may want to use Ray actors by specifying ``compute=ray.data.ActorPoolStrategy(min, max)`` and Ray will use an autoscaling actor pool of ``min`` to ``max`` actors to execute your transforms.

Reviewer: We should mention that the actor compute strategy will cache that stateful setup at actor creation time, and that's why it's useful for transformations requiring stateful setup.

Passing and accessing datasets
------------------------------

> Datasets can be passed to Ray tasks or actors and accessed with ``.iter_batches()`` or ``.iter_rows()``.

Reviewer: These functions should be cross-references to the API docs as well

This does not incur a copy, since the blocks of the Dataset are passed by reference as Ray objects:

.. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/quick_start.py
   :language: python
   :start-after: __data_access_begin__
   :end-before: __data_access_end__

Datasets can be split up into disjoint sub-datasets.

> Locality-aware splitting is supported if you pass in a list of actor handles to the ``split()`` function along with the number of desired splits.

Reviewer: Same here, cross-reference for `.split()`

This is a common pattern useful for loading and splitting data between distributed training actors:

.. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/quick_start.py
   :language: python

>    :start-after: __dataset_split_begin__

Reviewer 2: Line wrap this one.

Author: Done.
